Lessons learned at USDS
=======================

From 2015 to 2017 I worked for the United States Digital Service, a team within
the US Government, created after the launch failure of healthcare.gov,
dedicated to improving the government's ability to use technology. There are a
lot of things I learned about: bureaucracy, PL/SQL, organizational
transformation, Classic ASP, to name a few. However this post will instead be
about two meta-lessons I learned from my time at USDS.

The first lesson is that we live in a world of our own creation. For most
people, certainly for myself pre-USDS, the federal government can seem large,
abstract, and the people in charge of it distant. Even state and local
government don't feel that accessible. It's easy to start to think that cabinet
secretaries, congresspeople, and other folks in government are aliens. The
truth of the matter is that most of them are normal people like you, except
instead of deciding that they wanted to design and engineer products and
infrastructure, they decided they wanted to run a VA office that processes
disability claims or study and implement national healthcare policy.

I say that we live in a world of our creation because I've seen that if you
want to have an impact on how things function at the national level, all you
have to do is *decide* that that's what you want to do with your time. Which is
not to say it's easy, or that you always accomplish what you set out to, but my
time at USDS taught me that you have to decide to try, and to believe that it's
possible for a small group of thoughtful and committed citizens to change the
world, because it is.

The second lesson is that there are things in life worth burning out for. For
as long as I can remember, I've taken it as an article of faith that burnout
was bad, and to be avoided at all costs. Avoid working too many hours, avoid
taking on too many commitments, avoid excessive stressors. During my time with
USDS, projects I worked on resulted in thousands of veterans getting their
disability benefit claims processed significantly more quickly, 30,000
additional refugees being admitted to the United States in 2016, and hundreds
of thousands of veterans being able to apply for health care online. I had
teammates who worked on helping student loan borrowers avoid default, helping
the immigration system scale to be able to serve more people, and helping
millions purchase health insurance for the first time. Accomplishing all of
these goals required doing precisely the things that lead to burnout. And it
was worth it, I'd do it again in a heartbeat.

Studiously avoiding stressors is a great strategy for avoiding failure cases
like burnout, but it also precludes certain successes. Maybe somewhere it's
possible to do as much good as we were able to, without needing to tempt
burnout, but I don't think we could have accomplished what we did without
pushing ourselves and accepting the extra stress in the environments USDS
operated in. And we were fortunate to have successes to show for it, hardly a
guarantee; I imagine I'd have a much dimmer view of my time if we hadn't been
able to help veterans, refugees, and many others. My experience at USDS helped
me understand that there are things you can accomplish for others that are
worth some risk to yourself, and the inverse, that some tasks simply aren't
meaningful enough to take any abuse for them.
