Response to Deputy Attorney General Rosenstein's remarks on Encryption
======================================================================

This week Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein gave two speeches on
encryption; one at the `U.S. Naval Academy`_ and one at the `Global Cyber
Security Summit`_. I recommend you read them, as the remainder of this post
will make considerably more sense.

I would like to focus on the structure of the second speech. Mr. Rosenstein
states that he wants to describe "the scope of the global cybersecurity threat
that confronts us" and "the challenges we face in countering the threat".

His description of the threats that face us will be familiar to anyone who's
glanced at the news in the past year: A data breach at Yahoo which compromised
all three billion of its users, the WannaCry ransomware which paralyzed the
UK's National Health System, and the breach of Equifax affecting every American
with credit. Given these threats Mr. Rosentein then presents the challenge to
countering them: encryption.

I would like to be as unambiguous as possible: the notion that encryption is
the challenge needing solving in each of these reflects either a gross
ignorance of the technical reality of these incidents and encryption or a
grotesque intellectual dishonesty -- the desire to make a point at the expense
of facts. Encryption did not cause any of these incidents, in fact the absence
of encryption very likely exacerbated the impact of all three of them. And
there is no publicly available evidence to support the assertion that law
enforcement has been unable to investigate any of them due to encryption.

Mr. Rosenstein plainly wants to reopen the "going dark" debate that began under
the previously administration, spearheaded by FBI Director Jim Comey [#]_.
While I disagree vehemently with him, it's a valid policy position - and I have
every reason to believe him that there are investigations in which encryption
does hamper the Justice Department and FBI's ability to investigate. However,
he is not entitled to mislead the public in order to make that point. And make
no mistake. Attempting to use the spectre of familiar computer security
challenges in order to make the argument that his policy is necessary, even
though his policy has nothing to do with these challenges, is the height of
intellectual dishonesty.

During the Obama Administration, I had the opportunity to participate in the
debate around shaping the administration's position on this question. If there
is one thing that is resoundingly clear to me it's that this is a deeply
complex area where attention to detail and understanding of the technical
problems is paramount. It is impossible to have an insightful conversation
about this topic without an understanding of issues like the distinction
between encryption at rest and encryption in transit, forward secrecy, or
distinctions between signing keys and decryption keys.

Denis McDonough said that this debate over encryption was the single most
challenging question he faced during his time as White House Chief of Staff to
President Obama. It has implications in law enforcement, national security,
foreign policy, commerce and international trade, and the security of the
government itself - nearly every element of the President's responsibilities is
implicated in this debate. And I witnessed Mr. McDonoughÂ and other senior
leaders call on every expert available to speak to these concerns, particularly
technical experts.

Encryption and computer security are technical subjects; there's no way around
this reality. And therefore they need a seat at the table and to be active
participants in this debate. Mr. Rosenstein's speech makes clear that he has no
interest in listening to technical experts - no expert with a shred of
intellectual honesty would sign off on his horrifically misleading speech.

The Deputy Attorney General says that he is interested in "frank discussion".
However, his actual remarks demonstrate he is interested in anything but - his
goal is to secure legislation akin to `CALEA`_ for your cellphone, and he
doesn't care who he has to mislead to accomplish this. Mr. Deputy Attorney
General, I expect better.

This is the third time the "going dark" debate has been opened in my lifetime,
and each time before the conclusion has ultimately been that this probably
isn't a good idea and that the U.S. government shouldn't pursue it as policy.
I have no doubt that a frank and honest discussion in 2017 will produce the
same outcome. But frank and open discussions start with an adherence to facts.

.. [#] Arguably it began in the 90's with the classification of cryptography as a munition and the Clipper Chip; but that's a debate for another day.

.. _`U.S. Naval Academy`: https://lawfareblog.com/deputy-attorney-general-rod-rosenstein-remarks-encryption
.. _`Global Cyber Security Summit`: https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/deputy-attorney-general-rod-j-rosenstein-delivers-remarks-global-cyber-security-summit
.. _`CALEA`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communications_Assistance_for_Law_Enforcement_Act
