Introduction to Fuzzing in Python with AFL
==========================================

`Fuzzing`_ is a technique in computer testing and security where you generate
a bunch of random inputs, and see how some program handles it. For example, if
you had a JPEG parser, you might create a bunch of valid images and broken
images, and make sure it either parses them or errors out cleanly. In C (and
other memory unsafe languages) fuzzing can often be used to discover
segfaults, invalid reads, and other potential security issues. Fuzzing is also
useful in Python, where it can discover uncaught exceptions, and other API
contract violations.

This blog post is going to walk you through getting started with `afl`_
(American Fuzzy Lop), a new, but extremely powerful fuzzer which can be used
on Python code. afl is very good at finding bugs. In addition to clever
techniques for generating random inputs, it also instruments your program, and
uses coverage data about what paths are being taken to find interesting new
bugs.

To get started, you'll first need to install afl. If you're on OS X and using
Homebrew:

.. code-block:: console

    $ brew install afl-fuzz

Next you'll probably want to create a virtualenv. Inside of it you'll want to
grab a copy of the Python afl tooling and install it into the virtualenv:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install python-afl

Now you'll want to write a small script which takes some input from
``sys.stdin``, and tries to parse it (or do whatever your program does):

.. code-block:: python

    import sys

    import afl

    from cryptography.hazmat.primitives.asymmetric.utils import (
        decode_rfc6979_signature
    )

    afl.init()

    try:
        decode_rfc6979_signature(sys.stdin.read())
    except ValueError:
        pass

Pretty simple. The ``afl.init()`` line is a thing for performance, you should
put that line after all your imports and setup, before you do anything
with ``sys.stdin``. You need to make sure that you catch any exception which
your code could throw, in ``decode_rfc6979_signature`` the only exception that
it's documented as raising is ``ValueError``, so anything else that's raised
is an error. Please note that this will only be effective if your code is
pure-python, if the majority of your code is a C extension (e.g. ``cPickle``)
you need to take a slightly different approach, which isn't described here.

Next you'll need to create a corpus of "example" inputs. It doesn't have to be
big, just a few small examples of what a valid input to your function looks
like. I've used as little as one input with success. Once you've got them, put
them all in a directory, one per file (the files' names don't matter).

Now you can invoke afl:

.. code-block:: console

    $ py-afl-fuzz -o results-path/ -i /path/to/examples -- /path/to/python /path/to/your/test/script.py

It'll pop up a curses display to let you know the progress, and you're off to
the traces. Some of the display is self-explanatory, for the rest you can
`consult the documentation`_. When afl discovers crashers, you'll be able to
find them in ``results-path/crashes/``.

Fuzzing can be very CPU intensive, so doing it on your laptop isn't the most
efficient way to do it, a large cloud server can be a good choice for serious
fuzzing.

And that's all there is to it! Happy Fuzzing!

.. _`Fuzzing`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuzz_testing
.. _`afl`: http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/
.. _`consult the documentation`: http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/status_screen.txt
